+++
published = 2022-09-10
description = "A simple approach to reloading pages in the browser during iterative development"
+++
# simple-reload

## Summary

simple-reload provides a straight-forward (~30 lines of JS and zero
server-side requirements) way of reloading a web page as it is iteratively
developed or modified. Once activated, a page will be reloaded
whenever it regains focus.

## Trade-offs

Mature solutions like
[LiveReload](https://github.com/livereload/livereload-js) are available, which
makes a different set of trade-offs. Please read this section carefully to
determine if simple-reload makes sense for you:

**Cons**:
* Reload won't take place until the page is focused by the user, which
  requires manual interaction.
  * This is significantly less burdensome if using focus follows pointer in
    your window manager.
* Reloads will occur even if there were no changes.
  * With e.g. LiveReload, a reload only happens when the server indicates
    there has been a change. This may be a big advantage for stateful pages or
    pages with lots of forms.

**Pros**:
* Tiny, easy to modify implementation.
* Can dynamically enable/disable reloading on a per-tab basis.
  * This can be helpful to keep a fixed revision of a page in one tab to
    compare against.
* No server-side requirements.
  * So works even from `file://`.
  * Makes it easier if using with a remote server (e.g. no need to worry about
    exposing a port as for LiveReload).

## Code

```js
<script type="module">
// Set to true to enable reloading from first load.
const enableByDefault = false;
// Firefox triggers blur/focus events when resizing, so we ignore a focus
// following a blur within 200ms (assumed to be generated by resizing rather
// than human interaction).
let blurTimeStamp = null;
function focusListener(ev) {
  if (ev.timeStamp - blurTimeStamp >= 200) {
    location.reload();
  }
}
function blurListener(ev) {
  if (blurTimeStamp === null) {
    window.addEventListener("focus", focusListener);
  }
  blurTimeStamp = ev.timeStamp;
}
function deactivate() {
  sessionStorage.removeItem("simple-reload");
  window.removeEventListener("focus", focusListener);
  window.removeEventListener("blur", blurListener);
  document.title = document.title.replace(/^\u27F3 /, "");
  window.addEventListener("dblclick", activate, { once: true });
}
function activate() {
  sessionStorage.setItem("simple-reload", "activated");
  location.reload();
}
if (enableByDefault || sessionStorage.getItem("simple-reload") == "activated") {
  document.title = "\u27F3 " + document.title;
  sessionStorage.setItem("simple-reload", "activated");
  window.addEventListener("blur", blurListener);
  window.addEventListener("dblclick", deactivate, { once: true });
} else {
  window.addEventListener("dblclick", activate);
}
</script>
```

## Usage

Paste the above code into the `<head>` or `<body>` of a HTML file. You can
then enable the reload behaviour by double-clicking on a page (double-click
again to disable again). The title is prefixed with ⟳ while reload-on-focus is
enabled. If you'd like reload-on-focus enabled by default, just flip the
`enableByDefault` variable to `true`. You could either modify
whatever you're using to emit HTML to include this code when in development
mode, or configure your web server of choice to inject it for you.

The enabled/disabled state of the reload logic is scoped to the current tab,
so will be maintained if navigating to different pages within the same domain
in that tab.

In terms of licensing, the implementation is so straight-forward it hardly
feels copyrightable. Please consider it public domain, or MIT if you're more
comfortable with an explicit license.

## Implementation notes

* In case it's not clear, "blur" events mentioned above are events fired when
  an element is no longer in focus.
* As noted in the code comment, Firefox (under dwm in Linux at least) seems to
  trigger blur+focus events when resizing the window using a keybinding while
  Chrome doesn't. Being able to remove the logic to deal with this issue would
  be a good additional simplification.
* The interaction with `sessionStorage` is redundant if setting
  `enabledByDefault = true`, but it doesn't seem worth adding additional
  code paths to avoid using it, or providing a second variant of the code.
